Goal: 
A program to calculate total or free concentrations of cations in the presence of various chelating ligands. 
Function: 
The method described permits the computation of the concentrations of free ions and ion-ligand complexes in a solution containing arbitrary numbers of divalent cations and ligands. It is required that the pH be known, along with appropriate sets of ligand-hydrogen and ligand-divalent cation concentration binding constants. It is assumed that these sets of constants are chosen to be consistent with the ionic strength of the complete solution which contains the divalent cations and ligands. The technique is an iterative one which provides upper and lower bounds for the values of the unknowns. The method does not require initial guesses at the values of the unknowns, and it gives correct answers even when the concentrations involved are many orders of magnitude apart. The present formulation of the problem is restricted to the case where only one cation can bind to a given ligand at any one time. The method is applicable to large molecules with multiple "sub-ligands" provided these sub-ligands are independent in their function as ion-binding sites. These sub-ligands need not all have the same properties. It is also shown that a simple modification of the method permits the determination of the subset of total ion concentrations that are required in order to produce a specified subset of free ion concentrations. 
Layout:
This is a Windows 11 GUI program to calculate the free concentrations of cations in an aqueous solution of known pH and  osmotic strength. On the main screen, there is a section, labeled “Ligands”, where one can select various ligands with drop-down boxes with an adjacent input box to enter the concentration in mM. The word “mM” is printed to the right of the input box.  There are 10 field pairs where ligands can be selected. The default for each ligand is <None>. Another section, named “Cations”, has seven rows respectively for Ca2+, Mg2+, Ba2+, Cd2+, Sr2+, Mn2+, and X. Each row consists of two main columns. The first column is labeled “Free Concentration” and has an input box where the free concentration can be entered. It also has an adjacent drop down box to select between nM, uM and mM. The next  column is where the total concentration of each cation can be entered in mM. The word “mM” is written to the right of the input boxes. Only one of the two (free or total) can have a user value. 
There is a separate section titled “Solution Parameters” that allows the user to enter the Temperature (oC), Ionic Strength (mM), and pH. 
The available ligands are accessible from a menu entry, where they can be edited and saved. The entries for each ligand are initially read from a configuration. For each ligand, the valence and log association constants and enthalpy are shown as -logK1, H1, -logK2, and H2. This information is shown for each of the cations H, Ca2+, Mg2+, Ba2+, Cd2+, Sr2+, Mn2+, and X. The following ligands are present: EGTA, EDTA, BAPTA, ATP, ADP, AMP, Citrate, Aspartate, Glutamate, Glycinate, and Gluconate. The temperature and ionic strength of each ligand is also editable. There is the ability to add new ligands. If any changes to the ligands are made, the user is prompted to save the ligand configuration file. A backup of the ligand configuration file will be made. 
When the “Calculate” function is activated, the program calculates the free concentration if the total concentration has been entered. Conversely, the program calculates the total concentration if the free concentration has been entered. 



